---
hide:
  - toc
---

# Quick start

This guide shows how to setup your own instance of asciinema server for hosting
terminal session recordings.

For a broader overview of what's possible with asciinema check out the [intro
guide](../../../getting-started.md).

To keep this guide simple we'll use the official asciinema server container
image,
[ghcr.io/asciinema/asciinema-server](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema-server/pkgs/container/asciinema-server),
in a [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) based setup. If you
prefer to use a different deployment solution it should be straightforward to
adapt the configuration presented below to specifics of your environment.

Here's a basic docker-compose configuration for asciinema server you can use as
a template.

=== "HTTPS"

    ```yaml title="docker-compose.yml"
    services:
      asciinema:
        image: ghcr.io/asciinema/asciinema-server:20240428
        environment:
          - SECRET_KEY_BASE=  # <- see below
          - URL_HOST=asciinema.example.com
          - URL_SCHEME=https
          - SMTP_HOST=smtp.example.com
          - SMTP_USERNAME=foobar
          - SMTP_PASSWORD=hunter2
        volumes:
          - asciinema_data:/var/opt/asciinema
        depends_on:
          postgres:
            condition: service_healthy
        restart: unless-stopped

      postgres:
        image: docker.io/library/postgres:14
        environment:
          - POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD=trust
        volumes:
          - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
        healthcheck:
          test: ['CMD-SHELL', 'pg_isready -U postgres']
          interval: 2s
          timeout: 5s
          retries: 10
        restart: unless-stopped

      caddy:
        image: caddy:2
        command: caddy reverse-proxy --from https://asciinema.example.com --to http://asciinema:4000
        ports:
          - '80:80'
          - '443:443'
          - '443:443/udp'
        volumes:
          - caddy_data:/data
          - caddy_config:/config
        restart: unless-stopped

    volumes:
      asciinema_data:
      postgres_data:
      caddy_data:
      caddy_config:
    ```

=== "HTTP"

    ```yaml title="docker-compose.yml"
    services:
      asciinema:
        image: ghcr.io/asciinema/asciinema-server:20240428
        ports:
          - '80:4000'
        environment:
          - SECRET_KEY_BASE=  # <- see below
          - URL_HOST=asciinema.example.com
          - URL_PORT=80
          - SMTP_HOST=smtp.example.com
          - SMTP_USERNAME=foobar
          - SMTP_PASSWORD=hunter2
        volumes:
          - asciinema_data:/var/opt/asciinema
        depends_on:
          postgres:
            condition: service_healthy
        restart: unless-stopped

      postgres:
        image: docker.io/library/postgres:14
        environment:
          - POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD=trust
        volumes:
          - postgres_data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
        healthcheck:
          test: ['CMD-SHELL', 'pg_isready -U postgres']
          interval: 2s
          timeout: 5s
          retries: 10
        restart: unless-stopped

    volumes:
      asciinema_data:
      postgres_data:
    ```

Let's break it down.

The `asciinema` container uses a server image version tagged `20240428`. This is
merely an example; please check the
[releases](https://github.com/asciinema/asciinema-server/releases) page for the
latest stable version number and use that instead.

The `SECRET_KEY_BASE` environment variable is used for encryption/signing of
user sessions (amongst other things). You can generate one with the following
command:

```sh
tr -dc A-Za-z0-9 </dev/urandom | head -c 64; echo
```

The `URL_SCHEME`, `URL_HOST` and `URL_PORT` variables configure the root URL
used for link generation. The `URL_HOST` should match the DNS name by which the
server is accessible.

Check [general configuration](configuration.md#general) for more information on
`SECRET_KEY_BASE` and `URL_*` variables.

The `SMTP_*` variables configure SMTP server used for sending short-lived login
links. If you don't set those no mail will be sent. However, you can still
obtain a login link from the server logs after entering your email address on
the login page. Check [email configuration](configuration.md#email) for more
details, including configuration examples for popular SMTP providers.

The server stores the uploaded recordings and other data at
`/var/opt/asciinema`. We used volume mapping for this directory, but you can
also bind-mount it to a directory on the host system, e.g.
`/path/to/asciinema/data:/var/opt/asciinema`, or use S3-compatible object store
instead. Check [file store configuration](configuration.md#file-store) for
details.

The server utilizes PostgreSQL as its database; therefore we have included a
dedicated `postgres` service, mapping its data directory,
`/var/lib/postgresql/data`, to a volume. For convenience, asciinema server
container image sets `DATABASE_URL` to
`postgresql://postgres@postgres/postgres`, enabling it to connect to the
`postgres` container automatically. Check the [database
configuration](configuration.md#database) for more information on
`DATABASE_URL`, including the use of a separate/external PostgreSQL server.

Finally, the `caddy` service runs [Caddy web server](https://caddyserver.com/)
in reverse proxy mode, with automatic HTTPS enabled for the domain specified
with the `--from` argument (which should be the same as the `URL_HOST` on
`asciinema` service). See [HTTPS configuration](configuration.md#https) for
additional information.

Assuming you have set `SECRET_KEY_BASE` and `URL_*` variables, and opened ports
80 and 443 in the host system's firewall, you can now launch the stack with:

```sh
docker compose up
```

You will see PostgreSQL perform its initial setup, asciinema server create its
database tables, and Caddy attempt to obtain a TLS certificate for your domain.
Visit the configured URL in your web browser to verify it's up and running.

Congratulations! You have your own asciinema server instance ðŸŽ‰

Now, point asciinema CLI to your server by setting `ASCIINEMA_API_URL`, and
upload a recording:

```sh
export ASCIINEMA_API_URL=https://asciinema.example.com
asciinema upload demo.cast
```

Check the [CLI configuration](../../cli/configuration.md) section for
information on how to set the server URL permanently via the configuration file.
